Proposal for ZooKeeper to KRaft migration process (#90)
strimzi/proposals: 058-zk-kraft-migration.md

Through the usage of one or more `KafkaNodePool` custom resources, alongside the main `Kafka` one, the user is able to define pools of brokers and KRaft controllers, and create a fresh cluster that doesn't depend on ZooKeeper.

It is currently not possible to migrate a ZooKeeper-based Apache Kafka cluster to be KRaft-based.

There is also no support to upgrade a KRaft-based Apache Kafka cluster to a newer version, but this missing piece is out of the scope for this proposal.

Furthermore, if the user creates one or more `KafkaNodePool` custom resources to deploy KRaft controllers, the operator itself just creates the controller nodes and restarts the Kafka brokers to use them. ZooKeeper is not used anymore but no proper migration takes place (from ZooKeeper to KRaft metadata). Because of KRaft and related migration from ZooKeeper not supported yet, this leads to the following [issue](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9108).

The ZooKeeper to KRaft migration implementation is defined by [KIP-866](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-866+ZooKeeper+to+KRaft+Migration).

> The upstream Apache Kafka community documentation also provides a [ZooKeeper to KRaft Migration](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#kraft_zk_migration) guide showing how to run the procedure manually on your cluster not deployed via the Strimzi Cluster Operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upstream Apache Kafka community documentation also provides a [ZooKeeper to KRaft Migration](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#kraft_zk_migration) guide showing how to run a procedure manually on a cluster not deployed via the Strimzi Cluster Operator.
```

> One of the main points to highlight is that such a process doesn't support migration to a KRaft-based cluster running in "combined" mode:
> 
> * Cannot migrate from a ZooKeeper based configuration to a cluster with nodes hosting both controller and broker (so actually reducing the number of nodes by removing the ZooKeeper ones).
> * The migration works by having ZooKeeper nodes to be replaced by new KRaft controller nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key points to highlight about this migration process: 

* Migration to a KRaft-based cluster in "combined" mode is not supported. Specifically, migrating from a ZooKeeper-based configuration to a cluster with nodes serving as both controllers and brokers, resulting in a reduction of nodes by removing the ZooKeeper nodes, is not possible.
* The migration works by having ZooKeeper nodes replaced by new KRaft controller nodes.
```

* Supporting "combined" mode is actually one of the rejected [alternatives](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-866+ZooKeeper+to+KRaft+Migration#KIP866ZooKeepertoKRaftMigration-CombinedModeMigrationSupport) in KIP-866.

It means that the user environment should be sized to host more nodes running in parallel, because during the migration process both ZooKeeper nodes and KRaft controllers will be running.
The end of the migration will involve shutting down the ZooKeeper nodes reducing the resources consumption.

After the migration, the users should be also able to migrate to use combined nodes for an additional reduction of resources, but that is out of the scope for this proposal.

## Motivation

The KRaft mode has been declared to be production-ready since Apache Kafka 3.3 release by the Apache Kafka project. 

> Anyway, there are still missing features as reported in the official [documentation](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#kraft_missing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite this, there are still missing features as reported in the official [documentation](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#kraft_missing).
```

The ZooKeeper mode has been deprecated after the Apache Kafka 3.5 version was released while providing the migration process to KRaft mode as preview.
The coming Apache Kafka 3.6 release will have such a migration process supported as GA and the ZooKeeper mode will be supported until Apache Kafka 3.7 but removed after that.
Starting from Apache Kafka 4.0 only KRaft mode will be supported.

Based on the above Apache Kafka community plan, more details in [KIP-833](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-833%3A+Mark+KRaft+as+Production+Ready), the Strimzi project needs to be prepared to allow users to migrate their current clusters from running in ZooKeeper mode to KRaft mode.

## Proposal

### Prerequisites

In order to start the ZooKeeper to KRaft migration, the following prerequisites should be met:

> * A Strimzi-managed Apache Kafka cluster running in ZooKeeper mode.

Author: I am not sure about this. The Kafka upstream community should aim to have a KRaft support with no missing features, or?

> * A Strimzi-managed Apache Kafka cluster running in ZooKeeper mode.

Reviewer 2: Yes but ZK is already deprecated, so actually no one knows for sure what will happen. Even if this in unlikely, there is no written agreement on that. Anyway, we can leave that out and use documentation in case of any missing feature.

> NOTE: the `Kafka.status.metadataState` field for storing the migration current state would be dropped when releasing `v1` API. It's anyway going to be used just for a transitioning period until community users will migrate all their clusters to be KRaft based.

The user "input" is represented by the user interaction with the operator through the `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation to be applied on the `Kafka` custom resource.
Currently, the `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation is already used to specify a ZooKeeper-based cluster by using `disabled` as value or a KRaft-based cluster by using `enabled`.
The new `migration` value is added and used by the user to start the migration process which is automated by the operator taking the following actions:

* deploy the controllers, configured with the ZooKeeper migration enabled, through the `KafkaNodePool` custom resources with the `role: controller` provided by the user.
* roll the brokers, configured with the ZooKeeper migration enabled and connected to the newly created controllers.
* run the actual metadata migration by the Apache Kafka migration component.

> Furthermore, the already available annotation values are using as following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, the already available annotation values are used as follows:
```

* `enabled` to finalize the migration by disabling the ZooKeeper migration and removing the ZooKeeper connection information on controllers and brokers, rolling the nodes, and finally having a full KRaft-based cluster with ZooKeeper ensemble still running but not used by brokers anymore.
* `disabled` to rollback the migration process, when still possible, to have brokers working again with the ZooKeeper ensemble only.

Other "inputs" for the FSM are represented by:

* the Kafka migration metrics checked by the operator during the actual metadata migration from ZooKeeper to KRaft.
* the readiness of nodes (controllers or brokers) after deploying or rolling them, depending on the step in the process.

The state machine is described in the following diagram:

![Migration Finite State Machine](./images/058-zk-kraft-migration-fsm.png)

The following sections explain the states and transitions in details.

> The "Phase"(s) reflect what is described in the official [ZooKeeper to KRaft Migration](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#kraft_zk_migration) guide in the Apache Kafka documentation but with the right degree of automation provided by the operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The phases reflect what is described in the official [ZooKeeper to KRaft Migration](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#kraft_zk_migration) guide in the Apache Kafka documentation, but with the right degree of automation provided by the operator.
```

```shell
# Enable the migration
zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable=true

# ZooKeeper client configuration
zookeeper.connect=<connection-to-zookeeper>
```

The operator waits for the KRaft controllers being ready, the quorum to be formed and leader elected, then the migration process moves to the state of waiting for brokers to register.

**_Status changes_**

The FSM moves to a `KRaftEnablingMigration` state to continue the pre-migration by configuring and rolling the brokers with the ZooKeeper migration enabled and connected to the newly created KRaft controllers.
This state is useful if the operator crashes and it needs to recover correctly on startup, not deploying controllers but continuing with rolling brokers.

---

When the controllers are deployed, the operator can proceed the reconciliation by configuring and rolling brokers.

**_Preconditions_**

The FSM is in the `KRaftEnablingMigration` state (as per `Kafka.status.metadataState` field).
The the `strimzi.io/kraft: migration` annotation is already applied on the `Kafka` custom resource.
The controllers are up and running and ready with the ZooKeeper migration enabled.

**_Trigger_**

> The operator just finished to deploy the controllers and they are ready or it's restarting after a crash while rolling the brokers.

Reviewer 3: I see. Thanks for the explanation.

The key points to highlight about this migration process: 

* Migration to a KRaft-based cluster in "combined" mode is not supported. Specifically, migrating from a ZooKeeper-based configuration to a cluster with nodes serving as both controllers and brokers, resulting in a reduction of nodes by removing the ZooKeeper nodes, is not possible.
* The migration works by having ZooKeeper nodes replaced by new KRaft controller nodes.
* Supporting "combined" mode is actually one of the rejected [alternatives](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-866+ZooKeeper+to+KRaft+Migration#KIP866ZooKeepertoKRaftMigration-CombinedModeMigrationSupport) in KIP-866.

It means that the user environment should be sized to host more nodes running in parallel, because during the migration process both ZooKeeper nodes and KRaft controllers will be running.
The end of the migration will involve shutting down the ZooKeeper nodes reducing the resources consumption.

After the migration, the users should be also able to migrate to use combined nodes for an additional reduction of resources, but that is out of the scope for this proposal.

> It is anyway not recommended for production workloads.

Author: Combined mode. I will make it explicit.

## Motivation

The KRaft mode has been declared to be production-ready since Apache Kafka 3.3 release by the Apache Kafka project. 
Despite this, there are still missing features as reported in the official [documentation](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#kraft_missing).
The ZooKeeper mode has been deprecated after the Apache Kafka 3.5 version was released while providing the migration process to KRaft mode as preview.

> The coming Apache Kafka 3.6 release will have such a migration process supported as GA and the ZooKeeper mode will be supported until Apache Kafka 3.7 but removed after that.

Author: I was relying on the published plan which seems not be right anymore. I changed a little bit making clear that support will be for all coming 3.X and then removed in 4.0.

Starting from Apache Kafka 4.0 only KRaft mode will be supported.

Based on the above Apache Kafka community plan, more details in [KIP-833](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-833%3A+Mark+KRaft+as+Production+Ready), the Strimzi project needs to be prepared to allow users to migrate their current clusters from running in ZooKeeper mode to KRaft mode.

## Proposal

### Prerequisites

In order to start the ZooKeeper to KRaft migration, the following prerequisites should be met:

* A Strimzi-managed Apache Kafka cluster running in ZooKeeper mode.

> * Running at Kafka 3.5.0 or higher and with `inter.broker.protocol.version` set to 3.5 or higher.

Reviewer 4: I'd bump the requirement to at least 3.6.0 as this is the first version that _should_ (it's not out yet!) mark the migration process as production ready.

For bringing migration to GA, we may want to bump it to later releases 3.6.X or even 3.7.X if bugs are found once people start to test it at scale.

**_Preconditions_**

The Apache Kafka cluster is running in ZooKeeper mode, so the `strimzi.io/kraft: disabled` annotation is already applied on the `Kafka` custom resource.
The FSM is in the `ZooKeeper` state (as per `Kafka.status.metadataState` field) and it keeps staying in this state until the user applies the `strimzi.io/kraft: migration` annotation on the `Kafka` custom resource, and creates the `KafkaNodePool` custom resources(s) for the KRaft controllers.

**_Trigger_**

The user creates the `KafkaNodePool` custom resource(s) containing the definition of the KRaft controllers which are going to replace the ZooKeeper nodes.
The user sets the `strimzi.io/kraft: migration` annotation on the `Kafka` custom resource. 

**_Actions_**

The operator starts a reconciliation and, via the `KafkaReconciler` component, creates and configures the controllers accordingly with the ZooKeeper migration flag and the connection to the ZooKeeper ensemble.
The controllers are automatically created with the following configuration (the user cannot set them manually).

```shell
# Enable the migration
zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable=true

# ZooKeeper client configuration

> zookeeper.connect=<connection-to-zookeeper>

Reviewer 4: Does Strimzi support using TLS/SASL when connecting to ZooKeeper?

Author: Yeah, all the `zookeeper.*` properties are set properly for TLS.

```

The operator waits for the KRaft controllers being ready, the quorum to be formed and leader elected, then the migration process moves to the state of waiting for brokers to register.

**_Status changes_**

The FSM moves to a `KRaftEnablingMigration` state to continue the pre-migration by configuring and rolling the brokers with the ZooKeeper migration enabled and connected to the newly created KRaft controllers.
This state is useful if the operator crashes and it needs to recover correctly on startup, not deploying controllers but continuing with rolling brokers.

---

When the controllers are deployed, the operator can proceed the reconciliation by configuring and rolling brokers.

**_Preconditions_**

The FSM is in the `KRaftEnablingMigration` state (as per `Kafka.status.metadataState` field).

> The the `strimzi.io/kraft: migration` annotation is already applied on the `Kafka` custom resource.

Reviewer 4: nit: Extra `the`

The controllers are up and running and ready with the ZooKeeper migration enabled.

**_Trigger_**

The operator just finished to deploy the controllers and they are ready or it's restarting after a crash while rolling the brokers.

**_Actions_**

During the current reconciliation and, via the `KafkaReconciler` component, the operator updates the brokers' configuration with the ZooKeeper migration flag enabled and with the new KRaft controllers quorum connection information as well.
More specifically, the brokers are automatically updated with the following configuration (the user cannot set them manually).

```shell
# KRaft controller quorum configuration
controller.quorum.voters=<voters>
controller.listener.names=CONTROLLER

# The controller.listener.name should also be added to listener.security.property.map

> listener.security.protocol.map=PLAINTEXT:PLAINTEXT,CONTROLLER:PLAINTEXT

Reviewer 4: I assume if security is enabled on the controllers, the required settings are automatically included accordingly?

Author: Yes.

Finally, the operator rolls the brokers, via the `KafkaRoller`, and waits for them to be ready again.
The current reconciliation ends.

**_Status changes_**

The FSM moves back to the `KRaftEnablingMigration`, so actually at the beginning of the Phase 2.

---

If the user doesn't rollback the migration, next step is to finalize the migration process. This step is irreversible.

**_Preconditions_**

The FSM is in the `KRaftDualWriting` state (as per `Kafka.status.metadataState` field) and the operator expects the user desire to finalize the migration, having a full KRaft based cluster and ZooKeeper out of the picture.

**_Trigger_**

The user applies the `strimzi.io/kraft: enabled` annotation to the `Kafka` custom resource.

**_Actions_**

The operator starts a reconciliation and, via the `KafkaReconciler` component, updates the brokers' configuration by removing the ZooKeeper migration flag and connection to the ZooKeeper ensemble.
It also has to replace the `broker.id` with `node.id`.
More specifically, the brokers are automatically updated with the following configuration (the user cannot set them manually).

```shell
# replace broker.id with node.id
node.id=0

> # Remove the migration enabled flag

Reviewer 4: Are the settings actually commented out or are they removed from the configuration?

Author: They are removed. The snippet has them commented out just to explain what's going to be "disabled". I followed the way the official Kafka documentation does, which is understandable imho.
